==================
 About this guide
==================

.. highlight:: inform6

.. epigraph::

   | |CENTER| *If they asked me, I could write a book;*
   | |CENTER| *About the way you TALK, and LISTEN; And LOOK.*

   -- with apologies to Richard Rodgers and Lorenz Hart.

.. only:: html

  .. image:: /images/picT.png
     :align: left

.. raw:: latex

    \dropcap{t}

ext adventures, otherwise known collectively as interactive fiction (IF),
were highly popular computer games during the 1980s.  As technology evolved
they faded from the market, unable to compete with increasingly
sophisticated graphical games; however, IF was far from dead.  The Internet
grew, and Usenet discussion forums offered a focal point for fans of the
genre.  By developing IF programming tools and systems, organising contests
and writing tutorials and reviews, these enthusiasts have led a revival
responsible for many notable works, including some whose quality arguably
surpasses that of the best commercial titles of the 1980s.

.. Generated by autoindex
.. index::
   single: TADS

Nowadays, IF is a hobby; almost everything that you need to begin writing
your own text adventures is available, for free, on the Internet.  While
expert programmers may relish the considerable challenge of creating
interactive fiction using a generalised language such as BASIC or C,
specialist IF tools have largely solved the fundamental world-building
issues.  The most common systems are Graham Nelson's Inform -- our subject
matter -- and Mike Roberts' TADS (Text Adventure Development System).  New
hopefuls arrive each year, but few achieve widespread acceptance; the
majority of today's IF (and virtually all the works generally regarded as
interesting, innovative, sophisticated, etc.)  have been created with
either one or the other.  In our view, only TADS bears comparison with
Inform in popularity, in being able to handle simple and complex stories,
and in availability on PCs, Macs, hand-held devices and a wide variety of
other computers.  But, since you're reading our guide, we'll assume that
you've already made a choice, and decided to give Inform a try.

We aim to provide a grounding in Inform basics.  When you have learnt a
little about it, you'll be able to design simple games for your friends to
play and, as you become more accomplished, which you can share via the
Internet with enthusiasts worldwide.  However, if you simply want to play
[#play]_ games written by others -- rather than write them yourself -- then
you don't need to learn Inform, and this guide isn't for you.

Scope and approach
==================

Because this is only an introduction to Inform, many features are treated
rather superficially, or ignored altogether.  The definitive text is Graham
Nelson's |DM4| (Fourth Edition, July 2001), commonly known as the DM4; you
cannot hope to use Inform successfully without having this splendid book by
your side.  Our guide should be seen merely as a supplement to the DM4,
offering step-by-step descriptions of those aspects of Inform which are
most important on first acquaintance.  In any matter where we seem at odds
with what Graham has written, you should assume that he is right and that
we are, well, confused.

As a tutorial, this guide is intended to be printed out and then read
sequentially; it isn't meant for online usage or designed as a reference
manual, though it does provide brief summaries of Inform's language and
library.  Our approach is to teach you about Inform through the creation of
three games: all short, all playable to completion.  "Heidi" is just about
as simple as an IF game can be, but still manages to introduce a range of
important concepts.  "William Tell", a retelling of the famous folk tale,
is nearly as brief but roams more widely in its use of Inform's
capabilities.  Finally "Captain Fate" presents a comic-book hero in urgent
need of a change.  By the end of the guide, we'll have touched on less than
half of Inform's capabilities, but we hope we'll have mentioned most of the
things that matter when you're starting out to design your first Inform
game.

One final point: Inform is a powerful system, often offering several
different ways of tackling a particular design requirement.  We've tried to
present things as simply and consistently as possible, but you shouldn't be
surprised to discover other approaches, maybe shorter, maybe more
efficient, than those shown here.

Presentation and style
======================

Most of the guide's text appears in this typeface, except where we're using
words which are part of the Inform system (like ``print``, ``Include``,
``VerbLib``) or are extracted from one of our games (like ``bird``,
``nest``, ``top_of_tree``).

.. only:: html

   Terms that are included in the :doc:`Glossary <appendices/g>` appear as
   links to that glossary entry.

.. only:: latex

   Terms that are included in the :doc:`Glossary <appendices/g>` appear in
   blue italic.  In the PDF version, these are links to the glossary entry.

We switch to italic type for a placeholder: for example you should read the
Inform statement:

   :samp:`print "{string}";`

as meaning "display on the player's screen the arbitrary character or
characters which are represented here by the placeholder *string*".
Examples might include::

  print "Hello world!";
  print "Fourscore and seven years ago our fathers brought forth on
         this continent a new nation, [...] and that government of
	 the people, by the people, for the people shall not perish
	 from the earth.";

We place the "TYPE" symbol alongside game fragments which you can type in
as a part of our working examples.  This differentiates them from other
code snippets whose only purpose is to illustrate some particular feature.

.. todo::

   The "TYPE" symbol doesn't really work here.  Think of a better way to
   indicate typed-in fragments.

Useful Internet resources
=========================

One of our basic assumptions -- along with your burning desire to learn
Inform and your ability to work comfortably with the files and folders on
your computer -- is that you have access to the Internet.  This is pretty
well essential, since almost everything you need is available only via this
medium.  In particular, you'll find much helpful material at these
locations:

*   http://www.inform-fiction.org/

    The Inform home page, maintained by Graham Nelson and a small team of
    helpers.  Most important, this is where you can find the |DM4| in PDF
    format.

*   http://mirror.ifarchive.org/

    .. Generated by autoindex
    .. index::
       single: IF Archive

    The IF Archive (or actually a high-speed mirror copy of it), from which
    you can download almost anything that's free and in the public domain.
    For a clickable map of Inform-related parts of the Archive, see
    http://www.firthworks.com/roger/informfaq/hh.html.

    .. note::

       Prior to August 2001, the IF Archive was located elsewhere, at
       ftp://ftp.gmd.de/if-archive/, and references to that location can
       still occasionally be found.  *Do not use* the old location: any
       information still available from there is likely to be out-of-date.

*   http://www.firthworks.com/roger/

    Roger Firth's Inform pages, including the Informary (what's new in
    Inform?), and the Inform Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ) pages.

*   http://www.plover.net/~textfire/raiffaq/

    A more general list of FAQs about IF authorship, covering both Inform
    and the other main systems.

*   :newsgroup:`rec.arts.int-fiction`

    .. Generated by autoindex
    .. index::
       single: RAIF

    The Usenet newsgroup for authors of IF, commonly known by the
    abbreviation RAIF.  Here you'll find discussion on IF technology,
    criticism and game design issues, and fast, friendly and knowledgeable
    assistance with your own "how do I..." questions (but please, look in
    the manual first).

*   :newsgroup:`rec.games.int-fiction`

    .. Generated by autoindex
    .. index::
       single: RGIF

    The complementary newsgroup for IF *players*, often known as RGIF.

.. todo::

   Update these links appropriately.  The newsgroups in particular are
   mostly unused these days.

Acknowledgements
================

Becoming sufficiently conversant with Inform to be able to share it with
others is not something done quickly or in isolation.  In getting to where
we are today, we have been assisted at many times and in many ways by the
notably supportive and good-natured people, far too numerous to list by
name, who make ``rec.arts.int-fiction`` such an invaluable IF resource.  We
are grateful to you all.

In creating this guide, we have received specific help from a number of
people.  First and foremost we must mention Graham Nelson, who kindly wrote
the Foreword, and delighted us with long and detailed lists of helpful
comments and suggestions on two of our drafts; also Dennis G.  Jerz, who
patiently and skilfully edited the text, making innumerable improvements to
our often wayward and inconsistent prose.  David Cornelson supervised the
Second Edition's transformation into professionally printed respectability.
Further assistance came from Barney Firth, Christine Firth, Harry Firth,
Megan Firth, Jim Fisher, Rosemary Frezza, Phil Graham, Graham Holden, Paul
Johnson, Yoon Ha Lee, Brian Pylant, Jo Quinn, Milos Radovanovic, Muffy
St. Bernard, Gunther Schmidl, Emily Short, Curt Siffert, A. Sloe, Pavel
Soukenik, Elise Stone, Brent VanFossen and R. Cliff Young.  Thank you: it
is impossible to overstate the value of this freely given support and
assistance.

The drop capitals, and their associated poem, are from "A Picture
Alphabet", digitised from a collection of public domain woodcuts, circa
1834, by Steven J.  Lundeen of emerald city fontwerks.

All credit to the generosity of http://briefcase.yahoo.com/ for making
international file-sharing such a breeze.

Finally, of course, we owe an enormous debt of gratitude to Graham Nelson
for devising it all, thereby giving us the opportunity -- first
independently and later in enjoyable collaboration -- of using, and
eventually of presenting, the Inform text adventure development system.

| |FILL| *Roger Firth*
| |FILL| *Wallingford, England*

| |FILL| *Sonja Kesserich*
| |FILL| *Madrid, Spain*

| |FILL| *August 2004*

.. rubric:: Footnotes

.. [#play]
   If you feel confused about IF in general or about this distinction
   between writing and playing in particular, try glancing ahead at
   :doc:`chapters/01` and at :doc:`appendices/a`; also, you may find the
   Ifaq at http://www.plover.net/~textfire/raiffaq/ifaq/ helpful.
